Alright, so let's have a look at
deleting a slice of items from a list.
So have a look at the lists_intro file from the last lecture, that
I've got on screen. On line 12, we
replace a section of the list with the
items in another list. We're replacing
the items from position 3 to the end of
the list, and we're replacing them with
the contents of an iterable. Now instead
of replacing them, we could delete them.
To see that in action, I'm going to
create a new Python file called outliers.py.
Now for this example, let's assume we
have a set of data from some experiment.
We analyze the data and we get strange
results. On further investigation, it
turns out that two of our measuring
devices are faulty.
They return results that are outside the
range of possible values, for whatever
they're measuring. So we may have some data
that's been sorted. I'm just going to
paste this in, but you can pause the
video and type it if need be. It's
something like this:
notice that I've split that over two
lines, just so it fits easier on the screen.
You don't need to do that. So the first two values are much lower than the others,
and we can remove them from the
list. So to do that, on line four I'm
going to type del data, left and right
square brackets 0:2, and let's then
print the list after having done that, on
line 5 with print data in parentheses.
Let's run the program, and we can see
that it's deleted those first two entries.
Now the last two look a bit dodgy
as well. The first one is at position 16,
so we might try to remove them with
something like this: on line 6, del space
data, and in square brackets, 16: and
let's then print out the value after
doing that, or print out the list
after doing that. Let's run the program,
and you can see that didn't work. You
may have spotted the problem.
On line 2, the entry 350 is at position 16, but
we've already deleted two items on line 4.
So that means that 350 is now
position 14, so that's why line 6
didn't do what we wanted. Now that's
pretty obvious here. We're deleting the
items manually and you probably wouldn't
make the mistake that I made on line 6.
That should be 14, rather than 16. So if you run the program, now it works.
Alright, so why have I spent
time making an obvious mistake. I've done
it because it's something that causes
problems when you come to automate the process.
Alright, so what I'm going to do is
comment out those lines, and let's get
the computer to delete those rogue
values automatically. Now I'm going to
assume that we've already analyzed the
data and decided the correct values
should be in the range 100 and 200,
inclusive. So I'm going to use two
variables to store those two values. So
let's go ahead and do that.
We'll say min_valid equals
100, max_valid is equal to 200.
Now you might use a for loop to remove
the outlying values, and that's where
you'll get a problem, and the cause
isn't obvious until you've seen it.
So let's type some code in, so for index
comma value in enumerate and in
parentheses, data, and a colon outside of
the parentheses. We'll have an if on the
next line, if parentheses value is less
than min_valid,
right parenthesis, or, then parenthesis again,
value is greater than max_valid
and then parenthesis colon del data, with index in between the square brackets.
Then moving on down to line
16, you could print out the value of data.
Now that looks like it should work. On
line 13, we test to see if the value's
less than 100 or if it's greater than
200, and if it is, we delete it from the list.
That's the code on line 14. But it's not
going to work. My deliberate mistake a
moment ago may have helped you to work out why, but let's run it anyway to see it fail.
You can see the first value is 5,
which should have been removed.
At the end of the list we've still got 360, as
well. Now the debugger will help to
understand what's going on here, so let's
set a breakpoint on line 13,
and then run the code in the debugger.
Alright so index is currently zero
and value is 4. That'll pass the
conditions on line 13, so line 14 will be
executed. So I'm going to step over.
I've got to line 14, I'm going to press step over to get over. I'm going to press step over again
Now in the debug pane, the list now starts
with the value 5. You can see that 4
has been removed. Step over once more. Now
check the values of index and value.
Index is 1 and the value's 104. 5 has
been skipped because it's now at
position zero. So I'm going to clear that
breakpoint, and instead set one on line 14.
That's quicker than stepping through
all the values because we're only
interested in what happens after a value
gets deleted. Let's resume the program.
You can see that it stopped on line 14.
We've got an index of 15 and a value of 350.
350 is about to be deleted, so I'm
going to step over to do that. We're back
on line 12, ready to get the next item
from the list, and if you count the items
in the list you'll see that 360 is at
position 15. The for loop has already
processed the item at position 15, and
we'll try to get position 16 next.
There isn't anything in that position so the
loop will terminate. So we'll step over
one more time. The loop terminates. We've
jumped to line 16, as you can see there.
Step over one more time to terminate the
program, and we can obviously see the output
in the output pane. Okay, so that's why we
didn't get the results we wanted.
The message to take away from this is to be
very careful when changing the size of
an object, that you're iterating over. If
you want to replace items with different
ones, that's normally fine, but deleting
items from a list, or any other mutable
sequence type, while iterating forwards
over it will cause problems, as we've
seen here. So for new programmers, just
remember that rule. Be very careful when
changing the size of an object that
you're iterating over. Now I've got an
additional comment for programmers from
other languages, such as C or Java.
If you don't know another language, then
don't worry about this next bit.
It probably won't make much sense and isn't
something you would have thought of
doing anyway. But for C or Java programmers, don't
attempt to change the loop control
variable in Python. In other words, you
wouldn't want to do something like this:
Now that code would work in C or Java
and a few other languages. Python for
loops don't work the same and that
wouldn't work. Step through the code
yourself and you'll see index being
reset, each time line 12 is executed.
So you can't mess with the flow of a for
loop in Python by manipulating the loop control variable.
Alright so I'll delete line 15. Let's finish
the video here and in the next one, I want
to look at a couple of ways to remove
those values. See you in the next video.